in this video I'm going to show you a
simple way to rig your characters for
complete beginners this is meant as a
starting point to get you into rigging
and moving about your characters in the
simplest way possible if you want to
take it further then do check out my
rigging and animation course discount
code in the description okay so I'm in
blender 4.1 but this should work in most
blender versions do check the
description for any updates I've got a
really basic character here if I go into
edit mode with tab so that's edit mode
up here you can see it's a really basic
character it has got a subdivision
surface modifier on so if I go to the
modifiers you can see that subdivision
surface modifier there and you can also
see the mirror above it as well and you
can rig characters with a mirror and a
subdivision service modifier and they'll
still work well so let's add the most
basic of rigs to this character do be
aware though that this is a very basic
rig it's not the most efficient rig but
it's a really good starting place to
understand what rigging is so I'll tab
back into object mode go to front view
and notice just quickly that my object
origin is at the center of the scene
that can be quite helpful and useful if
I press n on my keyboard and go up to
item you can see my character is
actually rather tall 3.58 M so I can
press Ester scale scale it down to let's
say 1.9 much more reasonable size but
because the object origins in the middle
at the bottom it's nice and easy to do
that so that's why you tend to get
characters that have their object
Origins at the bottom there okay so I
want to add an amature but before I do
it's a good idea to have the 3D cursor
right in the center of your scene if
it's not hold down shift and press s and
cursor to world origin that way when I
add my Armature it will be right in the
middle let's go back to front view with
one on my numpad shift a to add or you
can go to the add menu up here and under
Armature single bone let's zoom in and
see what's going on unfortunately this
bone is inserted into this person in a
rather nasty way but that does show us
that when the bone is inside the person
we can't see the bones and we want to be
able to see the bones all the time so we
can come across to the object data
properties that's with the bone selected
down to viewport display scroll down a
bit further and in front so the bones
will always be visible in front of the
character now to position the bones we
actually want to go into edit mode
because we want to keep that object
origin in the middle at the bottom there
and to edit our bones or add new bones
to this particular Armature and Armature
being a set of Bones we need to do that
in edit mode so tab into edit mode or
that's edit mode up here I'll zoom in a
touch and I'm going to start moving the
bones around now very quickly the bone
is split into three parts the head the
main body of the bone which selects
everything and then the tail at the end
here and you can move the head and the
tail or the whole bone together so let's
select the whole bone by selecting the
Middle s to scale it down G to grab in
The Zed axis and it is important to keep
it to the Zed axis so it stays in the
middle then we know it's right in the
center of our character I'll press G to
grab and this can be the first bone in
the Torso I'll just do two bones for the
Torso so the character can bend in half
to create a new bone we can select the
tail and press e to extrude and press
Zed for the Zed axis and move that up to
here for the neck e to extrude and the
Zed move that up to there and for the
head e to extrude in The Zed and take
that up to the top there okay so how do
we add in the arms well we can come from
this point here the start of the
neckbone E to extrude outwards like so
and that's like a clavicle e to extrude
to the Elbow e to extrude to the hand or
wrist there and E to extruded for the
hand Okay so we've got an arm in but
what about the other side well there is
a handy button here called X symmetry if
I click on that it should mean that
anything you do to this side will happen
on the other side so let's try and
extrude a hipbone out here so I'll
select the tail of the base bone there e
to extrude and pull that out to the side
here now it hasn't worked the Symmetry
and there's a reason for this whenever
you add a new bone to one side it
doesn't add one to the other side
because it's not labeled correctly
labeling is quite important for bones
particularly if they're on one side so
this bone for example down here the hip
bone I can rename that by pressing F2 or
I can go down to the bone properties
here and up to the top there we've got
the name as well and I can click on that
and rename it and I'll call it hip. l so
this is the left side of the character
so L represents the left I'll do the
same for the arm but I'll speed this up
so shoulder
DOL upper arm and you can put in an
underscore or capital letters or
whatever you choose forearm DOL and
handl so they've all got theirl now so I
can select my entire amature with a
right click and symmetrize and you can
see how those bones are now on the other
side and if I click on any of those
bones you can see in the name here here
and in fact in the top left here that
we've got that R now instead ofl for
this side hence why naming is very
useful so I can now select this point
here the tail of our hipbone e to
extrude and because I've got the X
symmetry turned on up here and it's
labeled correctly it's also going to do
it on the other side as well so I'll
bring that down to here e to extrude
down to the bottom here let's go to side
view now with three I'll just position
these a little bit better and E to
extrude down here for the foot I can
just reposition some of these as well
but generally they're not too bad now
you might want to rename your legs and
feet I'm not going to do that but that's
something that I would recommend you do
because at the moment they're just hip.
l003 and so on now how do we attach our
character to the amateure where we
parent one to the other a simple
explanation of parents is that the child
in this case the character will always
go where the parent goes so when I move
my bones the child of the bone or the
character in this case will move as well
the way we parent is we do this in
object mode so tab back into object mode
that's object mode up here we always
make sure that the parent what we're
trying to parent to in this case the
bones is selected last or the active
object so if I select the body and then
select the bones last the bones is the
active object you can see that in the
outliner there's Armature and there's my
body and you can also see it's
highlighted in yellow the active object
I can now press control P to parent you
can also find that in the object menu
under parent but I'll press contrl P it
simplifies the menu and under amateure
deform there's an option called
automatic weights we'll click on that
and I'll explain it a little bit further
so now if I click just on the body and
go to the modifiers we've got our mirror
modifier we've then got our subdivision
surface modifier to smooth it out and
then we've got the Armature and what
we've also got that's new is under the
vertex data we've got vertex groups and
each of the bones has a Vertex group so
let's say the hand just here will have
influence on the vertices around it and
also be given a certain weight so I'll
select our Armature I'll go into pose
mode so that's control tab or you can
choose pose mode up here and let's see
how we got on I'll select a bone and
press R to rotate and you can see that's
moving my character and I can keep
selecting different bones rotate them to
move different parts of my character now
like I say this is a very simple rig so
it might be a bit awkward to control but
it's done a reasonable job what you
might notice though is that there's some
Distortion around places like this this
is due to the weight of the vertices if
I zoom out just a touch come out of pose
mode back into object mode with control
tab or that's object mode up here and
choose the body then go into edit mode
now initially that goes back to its
original position but I can click on my
modifiers and choose this option here
display modifier in edit mode and the on
cage option which will actually move the
object into its position affected by
this modifier and you can see my
character is so simple that if I select
this Edge Loop here that's the only
piece of topology between these two
joints so there's a bit of distortion
there and ideally would have more
topology where there's a joint it's
worth noting there's a button within the
modifier called preserve volume so if
you do have enough topology and you're
still getting pinching that can
sometimes help it tries to keep the
volume of the shape in this case it's
not helping because we've not got enough
vertices in this joint here so I'll turn
that off but hopefully this should give
you a nice starting point I'll go back
into object mode back into my Armature
back into pose mode and you can see that
you can have lots of fun moving this
character around into weird wonderful
positions now like I say this rig is
very basic and there'll be a few
problems if I select the root bone like
this and press G to grab you can see
that the hip bone isn't linked properly
generally you have an extra root bone
for moving the entire object what we can
do here is if I go into edit mode for my
character I can make sure that these
bones move for this one by selecting
both of them selecting the bone we want
them to parent to last and control P to
parent use keep offset if you want to
keep them in exactly the same position
now if I go into pose mode with control
tab cross the pose mode if I select this
one and press G to grab is moving my
whole character so there's a few handy
tips that should help you when rigging
your characters if you want to learn
more about this then I would suggest
taking my rigging and animation course
discount coupon in the description any
questions then comment below otherwise
thanks for watching and I'll see you
next time